## Introduction

Utilitarians agree that if the number of people that were ever to exist
is held constant, we should promote the _sum total of well-being_ in
that fixed population.[^1] But in reality, the population is not fixed.
We have the option of bringing more people into existence, such as by
having children. If these additional people would have good lives, is
that a way of making the world better? This question falls in the domain
of _population ethics_, which deals with the moral problems that arise
when our actions affect who and how many people are born and at what
quality of life.

Population ethics is not just an academic exercise. It is relevant to
many important practical questions, such as how many children we ought
to have, if any; how much we should invest in climate change mitigation;
and how much we should worry about near-term risks of human extinction.

This article will survey five major approaches to population ethics:

1. The _total view_ that evaluates populations according to the total
   amount of well-being that they contain.
2. The _average view_ that instead focuses on the _average_ well-being
   level in the population.
3. _Variable value theories_ that take both factors into account,
   approximating the total view for smaller populations and the average
   view for larger populations.
4. _Critical level_ (and _critical range_) _theories_ that tweak the
   total view to only count positive well-being above a critical
   baseline level (or range).
5. _Person-affecting views_ that deny we have (non-instrumental) reason
   to add happy lives to the world.[^2]

## The Total View

According to the _total view_ of population ethics:

> **One outcome is better than another if and only if it contains
> greater total well-being.**[^3]

Importantly, one population may have greater total well-being than
another in virtue of having more people. One way to calculate this total
is to multiply the number of individuals (N) with their average quality
of life (Q).[^4] We can, therefore, represent the total view by the
following value function:

**Value<sub>total view</sub> = N \* Q**

Consider a hypothetical world A with 100 inhabitants (N<sub>A</sub>) at
average well-being level 10 (Q<sub>A</sub>) and another hypothetical
world B with 200 inhabitants (N<sub>B</sub>) at well-being level 5
(Q<sub>B</sub>). On the total view, worlds A and B are equally good
because they both have 1,000 units of well-being (N<sub>A</sub> \*
Q<sub>A</sub> = N<sub>B</sub> \* Q<sub>B</sub> = 1,000).

When making such comparisons between hypothetical worlds in population
ethics, these worlds are often illustrated graphically. The width of the
following graphs represents the number of people, and the height
represents their average well-being level. Consequently, the graphs’
area—width times height—represents the total welfare in the hypothetical
worlds. Illustrated graphically, worlds A and B are equally valuable,
according to the total view, since their graphs have the same area.

![Total View](/img/population-ethics-1.png "Total View")

The total view implies that we can improve the world in two ways: either
we can improve the quality of life of existing people, or we can
increase the number of people living positive lives.[^5] The total view
makes no distinction between whether the additional well-being would
come to people who already exist or to entirely new people. For example,
the total view regards having a child that lives a happy and fulfilled
life as something that makes the world better, all else equal, since it
adds to the total well-being.[^6] Importantly, the claim is not that
having the child might make the world better in virtue of enriching the
lives of others; instead, it is that having the child is good in itself.
How good it is to bring a new person into existence depends on how much
better or worse that person’s life is than a “neutral life”. According
to this view, happy people are good and having more of a good thing,
other things being equal, makes an outcome better.

In practice, there are often trade-offs between making existing people
happier and creating additional happy people. On a planet with limited
resources, adding more people to an already large population may at some
point diminish the quality of life of everyone else severely enough that
total well-being decreases. It is an open empirical question whether our
world has reached the population size at which adding a person increases
or decreases overall well-being.[^7]

The total view’s foremost practical implication is giving great
importance to ensuring the long-term flourishing of civilization. This
entails taking [existential risk
reduction](/acting-on-utilitarianism#existential-risk-reduction) very
seriously as a moral priority.[^8] Existential risks—such as all-out
nuclear war, or extreme climate change, or an engineered global
pandemic—threaten the survival of humankind. If humanity survives,
civilization may flourish over billions of years, and an enormous number
of future people may get to enjoy highly fulfilling lives. The total
well-being across all future generations may be astronomically large,
and an existential catastrophe would irreversibly deprive humanity of
this potentially grand future. From the perspective of the total view
and many other moral views, the stakes involved with existential risks
are so immense that the mitigation of these risks becomes one of the
principal moral issues facing humanity.

### Objecting to the Total View: The Repugnant Conclusion

The most prominent objection to the total view is the _repugnant
conclusion_, originally raised by Derek Parfit.[^9] In its simplest
form, the repugnant conclusion is that:[^10]

> **For any world A, there is a better world Z in which no one has a
> life that is more than barely worth living.**

![The Repugnant Conclusion](/img/population-ethics-2.png "The Repugnant
Conclusion")

All lives in world Z are positive, but they are only barely worth
living. If the population in Z is sufficiently large, Z’s total
well-being—represented by the graph’s area—is greater than A’s.
Consequently, the total view implies that world Z is better than world
A: the repugnant conclusion.

On the total view, a sufficiently large increase in the quantity of a
population can compensate for any loss in the average quality of lives
in this population, as long as average well-being remains positive. Most
people find some trade-offs between quantity and quality intuitive; for
instance, almost everyone would agree that our world of about 8 billion
people is better than a world with only one person with a slightly
higher average well-being level. However, many people find the repugnant
conclusion counterintuitive and think that the total view takes
quantity-quality trade-offs too far. Given that no one in world Z has a
life more than barely worth living, it is tempting to think that Z must
be worse than A, regardless of Z’s population size.

Importantly, the total view need not imply that we should maximize
population size _in practice_. It is an open empirical question how best
to promote total well-being in real-life circumstances: blindly
increasing population without also ensuring a high quality of lives is
not guaranteed (or even likely) to be the best approach. But even if the
total view avoids repugnant implications in practice, it remains
important to assess whether its broader implications (for various
hypothetical scenarios) are ones that we are willing to accept.

As such, proponents of the total view might respond to the challenge
presented by the repugnant conclusion by debunking the intuition, biting
the bullet, or attacking the alternatives. We will consider these in
turn.

#### Debunking the Intuition

Our intuitions about these cases may be unreliable or based on subtle
misunderstandings.[^11]

First, the repugnant conclusion involves cases with extremely large
numbers of individuals with low but positive welfare. Many philosophers
argue that this is a situation where we should expect our intuitions to
be unreliable: human brains struggle to intuitively grasp both very
large numbers and how adding up lots of small values results in a very
large value.[^12] So we may fail to understand on an intuitive level how
the vast number of lives in world Z could ever compound to something
more valuable than world A.

Second, we may not adequately appreciate that lives “barely worth
living” are good rather than bad.[^13] A life “barely worth living” _is_
worth living, and a person with such a life has reason to be glad they
exist. Misleading representations of lives “barely worth living” in the
academic literature may contribute to this misunderstanding. While it is
controversial how to determine which lives are worth living, it has been
argued that influential examples in the literature—such as lives
containing no goods besides “muzak and potatoes”[^14]—are actually not
worth living.[^15]

Third, we may mistakenly imagine ourselves as part of the populations
being compared in the repugnant conclusion. Consequently, an egoistic
bias may push us to favor populations with a high quality of life.[^16]

#### Tolerating the Intuition

Proponents of the total view may “bite the bullet” and simply accept
that world Z is better than world A. They may point out that, while
initially counterintuitive, this conclusion is based on the compelling
goal to create a world with as much total well-being as possible. On the
total view, reductions in the average well-being level of a population
can be more than compensated for by adding sufficiently many lives that
are worth living. Since lives worth living are (one would naturally
think) an inherently good thing, it seems rhetorically overblown to call
this implication “repugnant”.

Indeed, it turns out to be remarkably difficult to avoid the repugnant
conclusion. Strong arguments, such as Parfit's “mere addition
paradox”,[^17] entail the repugnant conclusion without assuming the
total view to begin with. Consider the choice between the following
three worlds, A, A+, and B.

![Mere Addition Paradox](/img/population-ethics-3.png "Mere Addition
Paradox")

In world A, everyone’s well-being is very high. World A+ contains (i)
one population group that is identical to the A population in terms of
population size and average well-being, and (ii) a second group of the
same size but with slightly lower well-being. Most people would agree
that A+ is not worse than A (and may even be better) since, intuitively,
merely adding people with lives worth living (without thereby harming
anyone else) cannot make an outcome worse. Now consider world B with the
same overall population size as A+. The average well-being in B is
slightly higher than in A+ but lower than in A. When we compare worlds
A+ and B, it seems that B must be better. Not only are the average _and_
total welfare in B higher than in A+, but well-being is also more
equally distributed. Yet, if B is better than A+, and A+ is not worse
than A, it follows that B must be better than A.[^18] Repeating this
process—comparing world B with B+ and C etc.—leads to world Z with an
enormous number of people with lives barely worth living. Following the
above reasoning, world Z must be better than world A: the repugnant
conclusion.

Recent papers from Dean Spears and Mark Budolfson make a different case
for the inescapability of an extended version of the repugnant
conclusion.[^19] The authors argue that _all_ plausible theories imply
that it is sometimes better to add vast numbers of barely-positive lives
to an existing population than to add a smaller number of extremely
positive lives.[^20] From this result, they conclude that “the repugnant
conclusion provides no methodological guidance for theory or
policy-making, because it does not discriminate among candidate
[theories]”.[^21] Critics might respond that these new
verdicts—involving adding to existing populations—are not as intuitively
problematic as the original repugnant conclusion.

#### Attacking the Alternatives

A final response is to note that counterintuitive implications are by no
means unique to the total view. Several impossibility theorems prove
that it is _logically_ _impossible_ for any population ethical theory to
satisfy every intuitively desirable principle and axiom.[^22] One such
axiom is to avoid the repugnant conclusion. However, some philosophers
argue that avoiding the repugnant conclusion is not worth the
theoretical costs of giving up other axioms or fundamental principles.
Accepting the repugnant conclusion provides an easy response to the
impossibility theorems since the total view is consistent with all the
other axioms of these theorems.[^23] In light of this, a growing number
of ethicists have come to accept and defend the repugnant conclusion and
the total view.[^24]

To evaluate this comparative claim, we must consider the merits (and
demerits) of the competing views. Philosophers have proposed several
alternatives to the total view that seek to avoid (at least the original
version of) the repugnant conclusion. These theories include the
_average view_, _variable value theories_, _critical level and range
theories,_ and _person-affecting views_.

## The Average View

According to the _average view_ of population ethics:

> **One outcome is better than another if and only if it contains
> greater average well-being.**

Since the average view aims only to improve the _average well-being
level_, it disregards—in contrast to the total view—the number of
individuals that exist.[^25] Consequently, the average view is
represented by a simple value function, with average well-being level Q:

**Value<sub>average view</sub> = Q**

The average view avoids the repugnant conclusion because it entails that
reductions in the average well-being level can never be compensated for
merely by adding more people to the population.

However, the average view has very little support among moral
philosophers since it suffers from severe problems.

First, consider a world inhabited by a single person enduring
excruciating suffering. The average view entails that we could improve
this world by creating a million new people whose lives were also filled
with excruciating suffering, if the suffering of the new people was
ever-so-slightly less bad than the suffering of the original
person.[^26]

Second, the average view entails the _sadistic conclusion_:[^27]

> **It can sometimes be better to create lives with negative well-being
> than to create lives with positive well-being from the same starting
> point, all else equal.**

Adding a small number of tortured, miserable people to a population
diminishes the average well-being less than adding a sufficiently large
number of people whose lives are pretty good, yet below the existing
average. To see this, consider the following graph where world A has
lower average well-being than world B. Counterintuitively, the average
view thus entails that we should prefer world B over world A.

![Average view and the sadistic conclusion](/img/population-ethics-4.png
"Average view and the sadistic conclusion")

Third, the average view prefers arbitrarily small populations over very
large populations, as long as the average well-being was higher. For
example, a world with a single, extremely happy individual would be
favored to a world with ten billion people, all of whom are extremely
happy but just ever-so-slightly less happy than that single person.

## Variable Value Theories

To compromise between the total and average views, some philosophers
have proposed _variable value_ _theories_. According to these theories,
the marginal value of creating additional people diminishes—the larger
the existing population, the smaller the value of adding another person.

The simplest variable value theories may be represented by the following
value function, with number of individuals N and average quality of life
Q:[^28]

> **Value<sub>variable value</sub> = Q \* f(N)**

This diminishing marginal value allows variable value theories to avoid
some of the weaknesses of the total and average views. For instance,
Hilary Greaves writes that:[^29]

> Arguably, [the average view] is intuitively less plausible for small
> populations: if there are otherwise only ten persons who will ever
> live, for instance, it (perhaps) seems more worthwhile to add an
> additional person with a given positive well-being level than if there
> are already 100 billion persons.

At first glance, it is an attractive feature of variable value theories
that they approximate the total view at small population sizes and the
average view at large population sizes since they may thereby avoid the
repugnant conclusion.[^30]

However, variable value theories face problems of their own. First, in
approximating the average view at large population sizes, they risk
susceptibility to the same objections. So, to avoid approving of adding
(above-average) negative lives to the world, variable value theorists
must invoke an asymmetry according to which only the value of positive
lives diminishes but not the disvalue of negative lives. Adding negative
lives to a world always makes the world non-instrumentally worse, on
such a view, even if it happens to improve the average. However, such an
asymmetry leads to an analogue of what Parfit calls the _absurd
conclusion_:[^31] that a population considered to be good, with many
happy and few miserable lives, can be turned into a population
considered to be bad merely by proportionally increasing the number of
both positive and negative lives.[^32] To escape this objection,
variable value theorists must allow additional good lives to sometimes
_compensate_ for additional bad lives, without introducing further
unintended consequences that undermine their view. This is no easy
task.[^33]

## Critical Level and Critical Range Theories

According to critical level theories:

> **Adding an individual makes an outcome better to the extent that
> their well-being exceeds some critical level.**

Consequently, an outcome can be made worse not only by bringing into
existence an individual with negative well-being, but also if their
well-being is positive yet below the critical level.[^34]

The total value of an outcome, according to critical level theories, can
be represented by the following value function, with number of
individuals N, average quality of live Q, and critical level α:

**Value<sub>critical level</sub> = N \* (Q - α)**

By looking at this value function, we may observe that the total view of
population ethics is simply a critical level theory with a critical
level of zero (α = 0). Critical level theories, including the total
view, agree that the value of adding an individual to the world depends
only on that individual’s well-being level and—in contrast to the
average view and variable value theories—not on the number of existing
persons or their well-being levels.

Critical level theories avoid the repugnant conclusion if their critical
level is greater than the well-being level that makes a life “barely
worth living”. This follows from the definition of critical level
theories since only adding people whose welfare exceeds the critical
level can compensate for reductions in the average quality of life.

However, a positive critical level entails an especially appalling
version of the sadistic conclusion, which gets worse the higher the
chosen critical level.[^35] This is because it implies that it is
preferable for a world to contain individuals with negative
well-being—lives not worth living, such as lives of constant
torture—than to contain vastly more individuals with lives that are
worth living yet below the critical level. Graphically illustrated,
critical level theories counterintuitively imply that world A (with a
sufficiently large population) is _worse_ than world B.

![Critical level theory](/img/population-ethics-5.png "Critical level
theory")

To avoid this unacceptable result, we may move to a _critical range_
theory,[^36] according to which:

> **Adding an individual makes an outcome better to the extent that
> their well-being exceeds the upper end of a _critical range_, and
> makes an outcome worse to the extent that their well-being falls below
> the lower limit of the critical range.**

By setting the lower limit of the critical range to include all neutral
lives that are neither good nor bad for the person living them, critical
range theories can avoid the sadistic conclusion. And by setting the
upper limit of the range at the point where lives become clearly
worthwhile, these theories avoid the repugnant conclusion.

What about lives that fall within the critical range? Life within this
range may strike us as _meh_:[^37] neither good nor bad, but also not
precisely equal to _zero_ in value, either. After all, some meh lives
(those toward the upper end of the range) are better than others (those
toward the lower end), so it cannot be that adding any life in this
range results in an equally valuable outcome. Instead, the outcome’s
value must be _incomparable_ or _on a par_ with that of the prior state:
neither better, nor worse, nor precisely equal in value.[^38] Note that
it may be better to add an upper-range meh life to the world than to add
a lower-range meh life, even though adding _either_ life is merely
“meh”, or results in an outcome that is incomparable with the world in
which neither life is added.[^39]

To further develop this view, we may think of the value of a life as
having two dimensions.[^40] In addition to the familiar
negative-vs-positive dimension, there is a second dimension of what we
might call _value blur_. When there is zero blur, the resulting values
are perfectly precise and comparable: any positive life, however barely
so, then constitutes an intrinsic improvement to the world. But as we
increase blur, the resulting value becomes increasingly “meh”, or
_incomparable_. If life's value had infinite blur, then _all_ lives
would be meh. (We will consider such a view in the next section.)
Alternatively, if we think that life's value admits of just moderate
blur, then sufficient positive (or negative) value may overcome this
blurriness to qualify the life in question as one that would be in
itself good (or bad) to add to the world.

The key implication of this critical range theory (with moderate value
blur) is that an intrinsically good life must contain _significantly_
more welfare than an intrinsically bad life, because between these two
levels there is a moderate range of lives that are meh, as illustrated
below:[^41]

![Critical range theory](/img/population-ethics-6.png "Critical range
theory")

The resulting view, while theoretically complex, seems less susceptible
to severe objections than the other views we have surveyed. In
particular, it can simultaneously avoid both the repugnant conclusion
and the sadistic conclusion. But it is worth noting that it cannot
accommodate the strong “anti-repugnance” intuition that the idyllic
world A is strictly _better_ than the repugnant world Z.[^42] Critical
range theories instead regard the two worlds as incomparable, due to the
immense value blur introduced by all those meh lives in world Z.

## Person-Affecting Views and the Procreative Asymmetry

All of the theories discussed above—the total view, the average view,
variable value theories, and critical level and range theories—are
_impersonal theories_.[^43]

|   **Impersonal theories** | **Value function (value of a particular state of the world)** |
| :--------------------------: | :-----------------------------------------------------------: |
|          Total view | **N \* Q** |
|         Average view | **Q** |
|    Variable value theory | **f(N) \* Q** |
|  Critical level theory[^44] | **N \* (Q - α)** |

> **N** = number of persons; **Q** = average well-being level; **α** =
> critical level; **f()** = strictly increasing and strictly concave
> function with a horizontal asymptote

Impersonal theories imply that creating an additional person with a
(sufficiently) good life makes the world better, other things being
equal.[^45] However, some people reject this implication. They say that
there are no moral reasons to bring into existence additional people—at
least no reasons based on the well-being these people would enjoy if
created. Jan Narveson put this idea in slogan form: “We are in favour of
making people happy, but neutral about making happy people”.[^46]
_Person-affecting views_ of population ethics attempt to capture this
intuition of neutrality, and are especially common among
non-consequentialists.[^47]

To this end, standard person-affecting views accept the
_person-affecting restriction_:

> **An outcome cannot be better (or worse) than another unless it is
> better (or worse) _for_ someone.**[^48]

At first glance, this principle sounds eminently plausible. When
considering only fixed-population cases, it amounts to an expression of
_[welfarism](/types-of-utilitarianism#welfarism)_: the view that
well-being is the only value. But problems arise when comparing outcomes
in which different people exist, especially if combined with the
principle of _Existence Incomparability_:[^49]

> **If a person exists in one outcome but not the other, it is not
> possible to compare their well-being across these outcomes.**

According to this principle, since the value of existence and
non-existence are assumed to be incomparable, existing cannot be better
(or worse) for you. When combined with the person-affecting restriction,
we get the result that your existence likewise cannot make the outcome
better (or worse). But we commonly think that lives of unrelenting
suffering would be worse than not existing at all. And an outcome
containing additional suffering lives would surely be, in that respect,
a worse outcome.[^50]

To accommodate these intuitions, person-affecting theorists must allow
that _intrinsically bad states_ (like undeserved suffering) can count as
_non-comparative harms_. Even if, strictly speaking, we cannot compare
existence to non-existence, we can certainly hold that a life of
unrelenting suffering is _bad for you_. The person-affecting restriction
can then be tweaked to specify that one outcome can be worse than
another if _either_ it is worse for someone _or_ it is bad for someone
(while the alternative is not).

Generalizing this reasoning would lead us to similarly hold that
intrinsically _good_ states (or positive welfare) can count as a
non-comparative benefit of existence.[^50a] But this result would rob
the person-affecting view of its distinctiveness. It could easily end up
coinciding with the total view, for example, and endorsing the repugnant
conclusion on behalf of the multitudes in world Z who would each receive
a tiny non-comparative benefit from getting to exist.

Many person-affecting theorists wish to avoid this result and instead
endorse the _procreative asymmetry_, according to which:

> **It is bad to create people with negative well-being, but not good to
> create people with positive well-being, all else equal.**

While many find this principle intuitive,[^51] it is notoriously
difficult to provide a principled basis for it.[^52] The procreative
asymmetry also has several deeply problematic implications, stemming
from its failure to consider positive lives to be a good thing.

The simplest such view holds that positive lives make _no difference in
value_ to the outcome. But this falsely implies that creating lives with
low positive welfare is just as good as creating an equal number of
lives at a high welfare level. For example, consider the choice between
creating either of two worlds inhabited by different sets of future
people. In world A<sub>1</sub>, everyone has a wonderful life. In world
A<sub>2</sub>, all people have lives that are much worse than in
A<sub>1</sub> yet still positive.

![Person affecting views and the asymmetry](/img/population-ethics-7.png
"Person affecting views and the asymmetry")

Clearly, we should prefer world A<sub>1</sub> over A<sub>2</sub>.
However, the simplest version of the procreative asymmetry implies that
both worlds are equally good—because they are not good at all.

In cases involving comparisons to empty worlds, the simple procreative
asymmetry sometimes yields verdicts that seem even more misguided.
Consider the following choice between world A and world B:[^53]

> **In world A, all but a few people have excellent lives. But some
> people suffer from an extremely rare disease that makes life not worth
> living. In world B, no people exist.**

![Person affecting views and the asymmetry](/img/population-ethics-8.png
"Person affecting views and the asymmetry")

Most people would prefer world A over an empty world B. But the simple
procreative asymmetry would seem, perversely, to favor the empty world B
since it counts the many good lives in world A for nothing while the few
bad lives dominate the decision. On this view, there are no worthwhile
trade-offs between good and bad lives. It would be better, supposedly,
to have no lives at all.

To help address these problems, we may consider a more complex
person-affecting view—one analogous to the critical range theory,
discussed above, but with infinite value blur, yielding the result that
_all_ (positive) lives are “meh”.[^54] On such a view, it is better to
create a flourishing life than a mediocre one (so A<sub>1</sub> is
indeed better than A<sub>2</sub>, at least if they contain the exact
same number of people), but _either_ choice is merely on a par with
creating neither.

But this brings us to a deeper problem with the procreative asymmetry,
which is that it has trouble accounting for the idea that _we should be
positively glad that the world (with all its worthwhile lives)
exists_.[^54a] Granted, the immense incomparability introduced by all
the putatively “meh” lives in A at least blocks the perverse conclusion
that we must outright prefer the empty world B. Even so, holding the two
worlds to be incomparable or “on a par” also seems wrong.

We should recognize that A is better. But to do that, we must reject the
strict procreative asymmetry and hold that there is an upper limit to
the “critical range” of lives that are merely meh. And this is
independently plausible. After all, when thinking about what makes some
possible universe _good_, the most obvious answer is that it contains a
predominance of awesome, flourishing lives. How could that _not_ be
better than a barren rock? Any view that denies this verdict is arguably
too nihilistic and divorced from humanistic values to be worth taking
seriously.

We may also raise more theoretical objections to such a view. For
instance, Ord (2020) notes that person-affecting views typically fall
afoul of one or more of the following problems:[^55]

1. having moral rankings change when “irrelevant alternatives” are
   introduced (such as preferring A to B when they are the only choices,
   but then B over A when an inferior option C is also available);
2. having cyclical orderings of value (saying that A is better than B, B
   is better than C, and C is better than A);
3. saying that all outcomes that differ even slightly in how many people
   exist are incomparable.

For all these reasons, utilitarians are largely united in rejecting
person-affecting views, even as they continue to debate which impersonal
theory provides the best way forward.[^55a]

## Practical Implications of Population Ethical Theories

Population ethics is a field of great importance for real-world
decision-making. In particular, which population ethical view we adopt
shapes the importance we should assign to preserving and improving the
long-term future of humanity. If human civilization persists, and
perhaps one day spreads to the stars, there could be an inconceivably
large number of future people with good lives. Their existence and
well-being depend in part on the choices we make today: especially how
many resources we, the current generation, invest in [preventing
existential
risks](/acting-on-utilitarianism#existential-risk-reduction), which
threaten the continued survival and long-term flourishing of
humankind.[^56]

The total well-being enjoyed by all future people is potentially
enormous. Consequently, on the total view, the disvalue of losing our
future is immense, and the mitigation of existential risks becomes
correspondingly important. The same conclusion also holds for critical
level (or range) theories, assuming that the average well-being of
future generations exceeds the critical level (or range).[^57]

Even on the average view, there is reason to expect the long-term future
to make a big difference to the overall value of the world. Human
welfare has improved dramatically in recent centuries due to
technological, social, and moral progress. Consequently, our generation
is driving up the all-time average of well-being among humans who have
yet existed.[^58] Further scientific and medical breakthroughs will
likely continue to improve the average quality of life in the future.
Therefore, even on the average view, it should be a priority to avoid
existential risks by virtue of the large future gains in average
well-being. The same is true for variable value theories, as they tend
to approximate the average view for large populations.[^59]

Proponents of standard person-affecting views (with a strict procreative
asymmetry) are sceptical of the claim that reducing existential risk is
of enormous importance. They would still think that reducing these risks
has some value because this reduces the risk of death for those alive
today. But they would not regard the absence of future generations as an
intrinsic moral loss. However, while these strict asymmetric views may
not be concerned about the prospect of human extinction, they may
seriously worry about the possibility of a dystopian future containing
many miserable lives. Averting such a negative future would be
critically important on these views.[^60] Others might be drawn to a
weaker (and correspondingly more plausible) version of the asymmetry,
according to which we do have some reason to create flourishing lives,
but _stronger_ reason to help existing people or to avoid lives of
negative well-being. On these moderate views, ensuring that the future
goes well would still be very important since so many lives are at
stake.

Finally, there is an argument from [moral
uncertainty](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/tag/moral-uncertainty):
given the difficult terrain of population ethics, we may not be entirely
confident of any particular view. Therefore, we should figure out what
degree of belief we ought to have in each theory and then take the
action that is the best compromise between those theories. As we have
seen, many plausible theories agree that improving the long-term future
is of great moral importance. Therefore, unless one can be extremely
confident in standard person-affecting views, it would seem prudent to
pay heed to this conclusion and take significant steps to safeguard our
future.[^61]

## Conclusion

Our actions affect the quality, quantity, and identity of future lives.
Population ethics deals with the thorny moral issues arising from such
effects on future generations.

According to the total view of population ethics, an outcome’s goodness
depends only on the total well-being, which may be increased by either
improving existing people’s lives or creating more happy people. In
contrast, the average view ignores the number of persons and only
considers their average well-being. Variable value theories seek to
better reflect commonly held intuitions about population ethics by
approximating the total view for small populations and the average view
for large populations. Critical level (or range) theories hold that
adding an individual makes an outcome better to the extent that their
well-being exceeds some critical level (or range). Finally,
person-affecting views deny that additional lives ever make the outcome
(non-instrumentally) better.

All of these views are subject to serious objections. The total view
entails the repugnant conclusion, according to which for any world A
(however idyllic), there is a better world Z in which no one has a life
that is more than barely worth living. The average view, variable value
theories, and critical level theories all entail versions of the
sadistic conclusion; that it can sometimes be better to create (few)
lives with negative well-being than to create (more) lives with positive
well-being. Person-affecting views rely on an unsupported asymmetry and
struggle to explain the value of existence (even in the most idyllic
cases). Critical range theories may do better, but even they cannot
support the anti-repugnance intuition that an idyllic world A is
strictly better than the repugnant world Z. The ubiquity of these
problems is no coincidence: impossibility theorems prove that no
population ethical theory can satisfy all the intuitive principles or
axioms that we might have hoped for.

The most important practical implications of population ethics concern
how much value we should assign to preserving and improving the
long-term future of humanity, and hence how important it is to [reduce
existential
risks](/acting-on-utilitarianism#existential-risk-reduction).

The next chapter discusses the most important implications of
utilitarianism for how we should think about leading an ethical life.

{{< next-page-textbook title="Utilitarianism and Practical Ethics"
url="/utilitarianism-and-practical-ethics" >}}

{{< how-to-cite authors="Chappell, R.Y., Meissner, D., and MacAskill,
W." >}}

{{< button >}}

## Resources and Further Reading

### General Discussions of Population Ethics

- [@Arrhenius2000PopulationAxiology]
- [@Chappell2021Chapter7Population]
- [@Greaves2017PopulationAxiology]
- [@Parfit1984PartFourFuture]

### The Total View and Repugnant Conclusion

- [@Arrhenius2006RepugnantConclusion]
- [@Arrhenius2003VeryRepugnantConclusion]
- [@Gustafsson2022OurIntuitiveGrasp]
- [@Spears2021RepugnantConclusions]
- [@Huemer2008DefenceRepugnance]
- [@Tannsjo2002WhyWeOught]
- [@Zuber2021WhatShouldWe]

### Variable Value Theories

- [@Sider1991MightTheoryBe]
- [@Hurka1983ValuePopulationSize]

### Critical Level and Critical Range Theories

- [@Blackorby1995IntertemporalPopulationEthics]
- [@Blackorby2005PopulationIssuesSocialchoice]
- [@Broome2004WeighingLives]
- [@Gustafsson2020PopulationAxiologyAnd]

### Neutrality Intuition

- [@McMahan2013CausingPeopleExist]
- [@Rabinowicz2009BroomeIntuitionNeutrality]
- [@Bykvist2007BenefitsComingExistence]
- [@Broome2005ShouldWeValue]
- [@Harman2004CanWeHarm]

### Person-Affecting Views and the Asymmetry

- [@Arrhenius2009CanPersonAffecting]
- [@Cohen2020ActualistExplanationOf]
- [@Frick2014MakingPeopleHappy]
- [@Frick2020ConditionalReasonsAnd]
- [@Hare2007VoicesAnotherWorld]
- [@Narveson1973MoralProblemsPopulation]
- [@Parsons2002AxiologicalActualism]
- [@Roberts2002NewWayOf]

### Practical Implications of Population Ethics

- [@Ord2020PrecipiceExistentialRisk]
- [@Althaus2019ReducingRisksAstronomical]
- [@Beckstead2013OverwhelmingImportanceShaping]
- [@MacAskill2022WhatWeOwe]

### Impossibility Theorems in Population Ethics

- [@Arrhenius2000ImpossibilityTheoremWelfarist]
- [@Kitcher2000ParfitsPuzzle]
- [@Carlson1998MereAdditionTwo]
- [@Ng1989WhatShouldWe]

[^1]: When we talk about populations, we mean total populations: not
    just how many people are alive at a specific time, but consideration
    of all people across all time.
[^2]: Other writers, following Parfit (1984), sometimes speak of a “wide
    person-affecting view” which allows for (non-instrumental) reasons
    to add happy lives. For ease of expression, in this article we use
    “person-affecting” in the more distinctive _narrow_ sense which
    rejects this idea.
[^3]: Throughout this article, we use the terms “quality of life”,
    “welfare”, and “well-being” interchangeably. These terms are used to
    describe how well or poorly someone’s entire life goes, not just how
    well-off someone is at a specific moment in time. Moreover, concepts
    such as “units of well-being” and “well-being levels” are
    simplifications used for illustrative purposes, and they do not
    imply that we can in practice precisely measure well-being.
[^4]: An alternative method is to add up the well-being levels of all
    individuals.
[^5]:
    The notion of a positive life, which is critical for the total view,
    only makes sense relative to a zero point on the well-being scale.
    This zero point is the threshold above which life becomes “worth
    living”. A “neutral life”, at well-being level 0, is neither “worth
    living” nor “not worth living”. This may be either a life with no
    value or disvalue, or a life with exactly as much value as disvalue.

    For discussion of the subtleties surrounding the concept of a life “worth living”, see [@Broome2004WeighingLives, pp. 66–68].
[^6]: Stronger still: on the total view, it would be intrinsically
    _better_ to create a new person at welfare level 100 than to improve
    an existing person's well-being from level 1 to 100.
[^7]: For an exploration of whether the world is overpopulated or
    underpopulated, see [@Ord2014OverpopulationUnderpopulation]
[^8]:
    Reducing existential risk is a priority not just for the total view
    but for a wide variety of moral views. However, for the total view
    there is an especially large amount of value at stake with
    preserving the long-term flourishing of civilization.

    [@Ord2020PrecipiceExistentialRisk, chap. 2]

[^9]:
    While Parfit deserves credit for raising the philosophical debate
    around the repugnant conclusion, arguably Henry Sidgwick noticed it
    much earlier, writing that “the point up to which, on utilitarian
    principles, population ought to be encouraged to increase, is not
    that at which the average happiness is the greatest possible... but
    that at which the happiness reaches its maximum”.

    [Sidgwick1907MethodsEthics p. 418]

[^10]:
    This formulation is taken from [@Greaves2017PopulationAxiology].

    Parfit’s longer original formulation was as follows: “For any possible population of at least ten billion people, all with a very high quality of life, there must be some much larger imaginable population whose existence, if other things are equal, would be better even though its members have lives that are barely worth living.”

    [@Parfit1984ReasonsPersons, p. 342]

    The total view further implies the _very repugnant conclusion_, according to which enough lives barely worth living can outweigh any number of additional arbitrarily miserable lives.

    [@Arrhenius2003VeryRepugnantConclusion]

[^11]: [Zuber2021WhatShouldWe]
[^12]:
    [@Broome2004WeighingLives]

    [@Huemer2008DefenceRepugnance]

    [@Gustafsson2022OurIntuitiveGrasp]

[^13]:
    [@Ryberg1996IsTheRepugnant]

    [@Taennsjoe1992WhoAreThe]

    [@Mackie1985ParfitSPopulation]

[^14]: This was how Parfit sometimes characterized the “repugnant” world
    Z, for example in [@Parfit2004OverpopulationQualityLife].
[^15]: [@Hutchinson2014EthicsOfExtending]
[^16]:
    [@Tannsjo2002WhyWeOught]

    [@Huemer2008DefenceRepugnance]

[^17]: [@Parfit1984ReasonsPersons, chap. 19]
[^18]: At least on standard assumptions. As we will see below, this no
    longer follows if, in addition to the standard trichotomy of value
    relations (being _greater than_, _lesser than_, and _precisely
    equal_), there is a fourth relation of being _on a par_. For then, B
    might be better than A+, while _both_ A+ and B are merely on a par
    with A.
[^19]:
    [@Spears2021RepugnantConclusions]

    [@Spears2018WhyRepugnantConclusion]

[^20]: To see how this applies to the _average view_, for example, just
    suppose that we have a base population that contains immense
    suffering. Adding a vast population of barely-positive lives may
    then do more to bring up the average than a moderate number of
    excellent lives would.
[^21]: [@Spears2021RepugnantConclusions, p. 28]
[^22]:
    [@Arrhenius2000ImpossibilityTheoremWelfarist]

    [@Arrhenius2011ImpossibilitySatisfactoryPopulation]

    [@Kitcher2000ParfitsPuzzle]

    [@Carlson1998MereAdditionTwo]

    [@Ng1989WhatShouldWe]

[^23]: [@Greaves2017PopulationAxiology]
[^24]:
    E.g. [@Tannsjo2002WhyWeOught]
	
	[@Huemer2008DefenceRepugnance]

[^25]: Note that the average and total views _always_ agree on the
    ranking of outcomes when these outcomes contain the same number of
    individuals. In such cases, both theories are said to be
    “extensionally equivalent”.
[^26]: This is a variation on the _Hell Three_ case from
    [@Parfit1984ReasonsPersons, p. 422].
[^27]:
    Definition adapted from
    [@Arrhenius2000ImpossibilityTheoremWelfarist]

    Note that this label is misleading. Whereas the previous objection noted how the average view sometimes favours the addition of miserable lives (which does seem sadistic), the so-called "sadistic conclusion" instead objects to the claim that adding a small number of negative-welfare lives may be _less bad_ than adding a vast number of moderately-positive ones to an otherwise very happy world. Insofar as this comparative judgment stems from evaluating (some) positive-welfare lives negatively, rather than negative-welfare lives positively, the "sadism" label seems a misnomer.

[^28]:
    Where **f** is is a strictly increasing and strictly concave
    function with a horizontal asymptote. That is, as N increases,
    **f(N)** increases at a diminishing pace, and never surpasses a
    certain limit.

    Cf. [@Hurka1983ValuePopulationSize]

    [@Ng1989WhatShouldWe]

[^29]: [@Greaves2017PopulationAxiology]
[^30]:
    They may avoid the repugnant conclusion since the total value of a
    population is subject to an upper limit if the value of additional
    lives diminishes asymptotically.

    Cf. [@Greaves2017PopulationAxiology]

[^31]: [@Parfit1984ReasonsPersons, chap. 18]
[^32]: Consider a good world with one billion happy people and a single
    miserable person. Imagine we repeatedly increase the numbers of
    happy and miserable people by the same factor—ten billion happy
    people and ten miserable people; one hundred billion happy people
    and one hundred miserable people, etc. For a sufficiently large
    population, every time we increase its size in this way, the world
    gets worse (according to these asymmetric theories) until we
    eventually reach an overall bad world.
[^33]: For one such attempt, see section 7.2.2 of
    [@Chappell2021ParfitEthics]
[^34]: The critical level is generally assumed to be non-negative, that
    is either positive or zero. A negative critical level would
    implausibly attribute positive value to (some) negative lives.
[^35]: Cf. [@Broome2004WeighingLives, p. 213–214]
[^36]:
    [@Blackorby1996QuasiOrderingsAnd]

    [@Rabinowicz2009BroomeIntuitionNeutrality]

    [@Gustafsson2020PopulationAxiologyAnd]

[^37]: While philosophers do not typically use this colloquial term, it
    may be helpful to imagine someone who, when asked whether the world
    is improved by adding a barely-worth-living life, shrugs their
    shoulders and responds, “meh”.
[^38]: Cf. [@Chang2002PossibilityParity]
[^39]: One may, for example, get this result by thinking of the critical
    range as representing a range within which it is _indeterminate
    where the critical level lies_. Or one may consider it a range of
    _reasonable pluralism_, such that one could permissibly treat any
    point in this range as the critical level when forming personal
    preferences about which lives to add (or not) to the world. On
    either approach, we can then _supervaluate_, and hold that
    population X is (truly, determinately, or objectively) better than Y
    just if this evaluation would follow from _all_ critical level
    theories where the critical level falls within the specified range.
[^40]:
    Gustafsson develops a view along these lines, though with different
    terminology than we use here (e.g. using "undistinguishedness" in
    place of "value blur"). See: [@Gustafsson2020PopulationAxiologyAnd].

[^41]: The following illustration is adapted from p.92 of
    [@Gustafsson2020PopulationAxiologyAnd].
[^42]:
    This may prove especially problematic if the critical range is
    symmetric, such that slightly negative lives also qualify as meh
    (rather than bad). Most would think the idyllic world A should be
    strictly better than a world "Z-" containing a vast number of
    slightly negative lives, but symmetric critical range theories will
    struggle to deliver this verdict. Cf. Gustafsson (2020), p. 95, who
    claims that this is not a terrible bullet to bite if the
    personal/well-being value of such a life is also blurry, and so
    “meh” (in our terminology) rather than bad _for the person living
    it_.

    [@Gustafsson2020PopulationAxiologyAnd]

[^43]: Here we use the term “impersonal” simply to contrast with the
    (narrow) person-affecting view. So even an impersonal theory (on our
    usage) can take the value of a state of affairs to be grounded in
    facts about what is good for particular people, e.g. if one holds
    that a happy existence can constitute a non-comparative benefit,
    parallel to how a miserable existence constitutes a non-comparative
    harm.
[^44]:
    The critical range theories we have discussed are more difficult to
    capture in a numerical formula. But if we put aside any lives that
    fall within the critical range, we might approximate the remaining
    overall value by separately summing the positive and negative
    welfare levels, to the extent that they exceed their respective ends
    of the critical range. So, using positive and negative subscripts to
    denote the respective numbers (N), averages (Q), and critical
    boundary points (α) for these two subpopulations, we can write the
    value function as: <strong>N<sub>+</sub> \* (Q<sub>+</sub> -
    α<sub>+</sub>) + N<sub>-</sub> \* (Q<sub>-</sub> -
    α<sub>-</sub>)</strong>.

    Alternatively, we might think of the value of the world as itself indeterminate or corresponding to a numerical range, as given by all the possible critical level theories corresponding to the critical range, i.e.: everything from <strong>N \* (Q - α<sub>-</sub>) </strong>to <strong>N \* (Q - α<sub>+</sub>)</strong>. On this approach, the value of the repugnant world Z, for example, would be indeterminate across an immense range of values stemming from _extremely negative_ to _extremely positive_, because <strong>N</strong> is unimaginably huge whereas the sign of <strong>(Q - α)</strong> is indeterminate, given the range of candidate critical levels <strong>α</strong>.

[^45]: On the total view, adding a person with positive well-being is
    always good, all else equal. The same is true for variable value
    theories, though for a large pre-existing population the marginal
    value of an additional life being added may be low. On the average
    view, adding a person is good, other things being equal, if the
    person’s well-being exceeds the existing average; similarly, it is
    good on critical level (and range) theories, if the person’s
    well-being exceeds the critical level (or range).
[^46]:
    [@Narveson1973MoralProblemsPopulation, p. 80]

    To put pressure on the slogan, consider the limited appeal of its negative-welfare analogue: “We are opposed to making people miserable, but neutral about making miserable people.” As this section goes on to discuss, the viability of person-affecting approaches to population ethics crucially depends upon validating a radical asymmetry between positive and negative lives.

[^47]:
    For instance, see:

    [@Finneron-Burns2017WhatWrongHuman]

    [@Narveson1967UtilitarianismNewGenerations]

    [@Narveson1973MoralProblemsPopulation]
    
    [@Roberts2002NewWayOf]
    
    [@Roberts2004PersonBasedConsequentialism]

[^48]: At least, it cannot be better or worse in terms of well-being.
[^49]:
    Cf. [@Arrhenius2000FutureGenerationsChallenge, chap. 8]

    [@Heyd1988ProcreationAndValue]

[^50]: Cf. Parfit's “wretched child” case. [@Parfit1984ReasonsPersons,
    p. 391]
[^50a]:
    [@McMahan2013CausingPeopleExist]

    [@Mcmahan2009AsymmetriesInMorality]
[^51]: Though one of the coauthors of this chapter has argued elsewhere
    that “it is thought to be ‘intuitive’ primarily because it has been
    implicitly confused with other, more plausible theses.” See
    [@Chappell2018RethinkingAsymmetry].
[^52]: [@Mcmahan2009AsymmetriesInMorality]
[^53]: Case description adapted from
    [@Beckstead2013OverwhelmingImportanceShaping].
[^54]: A major challenge for such a view would be to explain how to
    render this value blur compatible with the asymmetry, so that
    miserable lives are appropriately recognized as bad (not merely
    meh).
[^54a]: At least on the assumption that good lives predominate over
    miserable ones. E.g., a person in world A should be glad that that
    world exists.
[^55]: [@Ord2020PrecipiceExistentialRisk]. See especially note 25 of the
    Appendices.
[^55a]:
    Another possibility would be some form of _hybrid_ view combining an
    impersonal theory with additional person-affecting reasons to
    prioritize the interests of existing individuals. This would help to
    block “replaceability” worries—i.e., that impersonal views make it
    too easy to justify (killing and) replacing existing lives with
    “better” ones—without the extreme implications of pure
    person-affecting views.

    For a fascinating discussion of some of the complexities of adjudicating tradeoffs between ordinary harms and benefits and the noncomparative good of bringing someone into (happy) existence, see:

    [@McMahan2013CausingPeopleExist]

[^56]:
    In addition to existential risk reduction, another promising
    strategy to improve the long-term future is “moral circle
    expansion”: increasing the moral concern for members of some
    outlying groups to include, ideally, all sentient beings.

    [@Anthis2021MoralCircleExpansion]

[^57]: This assumption is plausible: with continued technological,
    social, and moral progress, the average quality of life in the
    future will likely increase further, as it has for hundreds of
    years. Only an implausibly high critical level—on which even the
    value of the average life in the present generation is negative—may
    render invalid the conclusion that existential risk reduction should
    be a priority.
[^58]: Although the suffering on factory farms might mean that our
    generation is driving _down_ the average well-being among sentient
    creatures who have yet existed. But technological improvements,
    particularly the development of [cultivated
    meat](https://gfi.org/science/the-science-of-cultivated-meat/) and
    other animal product alternatives, could render factory farming a
    temporary phenomenon.
[^59]: If what counts as a “large” population is much greater than the
    current population, this further increases the importance assigned
    by variable values theories to avoiding existential risks since they
    approximate the total view for small populations.
[^60]:
    For instance, Althaus & Gloor argue that reducing risks of
    astronomical future suffering should be an ethical priority.
    [@Althaus2019ReducingRisksAstronomical]

[^61]:
    Hilary Greaves and Toby Ord argue that (given a plausible approach
    for dealing with moral uncertainty), as the expected number of
    future lives grows, this “systematically pushes one toward choosing
    the option preferred by the Total View and critical-level views,
    even if one’s credence in those theories is low”.

    [@Greaves2017MoralUncertaintyPopulation]

    See also:
    
    [@MacAskill2019PracticalEthicsGiven, chap. 8]
	
    [@Ord2020AppendixBPopulation]
